The Man with Twelve 
Children in His Stomach 
(Wantok 443, November 13, 1982, page 15) 
Long, long ago, there was a man who lived on Lou Is- 
land in Manus Province [Lou People]. At this time, there 
were no people who lived there; only masalais dwelled 
there. 
The man did not have a wife, but he had an enormous 
belly. Inside his belly were twelve children. When the 
children were hot and wanted to bathe, they made a loud 
noise inside the man’s belly. 
One time, when the sun was bright, he saw and felt his 
belly making a racket, so he knew what it was. He got up, 
hit his belly and said, “One.” A boy came out. Then he 
said, “Two”, and a man big enough to be married came out, 
but he lived inside his father’s belly. Then he hit his belly 
for the third time and a woman came out. Her breasts were 
developed, but she was not married. He hit his belly eleven 
times and all his children came out except for one. When 
he hit his belly for the twelfth time, a beautiful young wo- 
man came out. 
The twelve children stood in a line and he asked them, 
“What do you want?” They said, “We want to bathe.” He 
told them, “You can go bathe, but come back quickly when 
you see that the sun is setting.” 
The twelve children bathed, sang, laughed and played 
with a crude ball. They made much noise. When they saw 
the sun setting, they quickly ran out of the water, tied on their “grass” skirts, rested and then ran back to their father’s 
belly. They did this every time. 
One time, they came outside their father’s belly and 
they went to bathe. They bathed and sang vigorously, 
played with a ball, and made much noise. However, they 
did not know that up above in a cave, there was a masalai 
sleeping. When the masalai heard the noise that the chil- 
dren made, he woke up and said, “Who is that making all 
that noise? There wasn’t all this noise before like this. I’ll 
go look outside and see who it is that’s making this noise.” 
When the masalai saw them, he said, “Oh my, that’s 
very good food.” He aimed a crude ball and threw it down 
to them. None of the children saw this. Only the young 
woman saw it and she told them. However, they did not 
listen. They were bathing and coming and going. The ma- 
salai saw this. He threw another down and the first boy 
saw it. Quickly, he called out to the others. They all ran 
home, leaving the little girl crying and coming from behind. 
The masalai came behind her, then held her and carried 
her. Then he followed the scent of the other children. He 
sniffed and followed and followed, then arrived at the 
man’s house. The masalai told the man, “Friend, did you 
see the children running by here or not?” The big-bellied 
man said, “No, I did not see the children running by here.” 
The masalai told him again, “Don’t lie to me or [’ll kill 
you.” 
The big-bellied man was afraid now and said, “They 
live inside my belly.” The masalai spoke to him and he hit 
his belly eleven times, then the children came outside. The 
masalai took all of them to his home and told them to stay 
in the cave above the pond. After he spoke to them, he 
went to grate some sago. 
The poor big-bellied man cried and cried for his chil- 
dren. While he was crying, a masalai woman turned into a 
little bird and flew to him. The bird asked him, “Why are 
you crying?” The big-bellied man said, “A masalai man 
came and stole my children. They went to his home which 
is a cave near the pond.” The masalai woman listened to 
this, flew to the masalai man’s home and saw that he was 
not there. The masalai woman knew that the masalai man 
had gone to grate sago and that he would return to eat it 
with the children. 
Each part of his body was working. His two hands 
were working, one grating the sago and the other carrying 
it. One leg was rinsing the sago and the other was carrying 
water for rinsing. 
His belly and head were there, and his mouth was 
chewing betel nut. When the masalai woman saw this, she 
flew back and worked at breaking the cave door. After she 
299 

330
broke it, she sang and danced, then the inner door opened 
and the children came outside. She took all of them, deco- 
rated them and told them to go up a small tree. She sang 
and danced and took a tanget sprout, then very quickly, the 
tree grew very big and tall. She told the children to sing, 
and they sang vigorously. 
The masalai man carried the sago back to the village 
and saw that his home had been broken into. He was furi- 
ous. He took his axe then went and saw the children sing- 
ing. He called out, “Hey, you there! Now I'll cut the tree 
So, he chopped and chopped. When 2 
and eat all of you.’ 
the tree was about to fall, the masalai woman made a song 
and dance again and the tree stood up. The masalai man 
was furious and began to climb the tree. As he approached 
them, the masalai woman immediately took the axe and cut 
his neck. He fell down to the ground. 
The masalai woman sang and danced again then they 
went directly to their home in the big-bellied man. When 
the big-bellied man saw his children, he was very happy 
and cried with them. When all of the children came down 
from the tree, they thanked the masalai woman, then the 
tree became small again. 
