Long, long ago, there was a married couple that lived
in a village. The man’s name was Daga and his wife’s
name was Elekina. They had a little son whose name was
Nime.
One day, the father told the mother, “Tonight you
should cook sweet potatoes and put them aside. In the early
morning, I'll take Nime and we’ll go hunt for wild game in
the forest.”
In the very early morning, the father and Nime, his son,
awoke. They carried a bow and arrows and their food, then
they left for the forest. They walked and walked until they arrived at the base of a big mountain. They sat and rested,
then they went inside the forest and began to hunt for marsupials (kapul).
The father walked and walked, then he saw a giant tree
standing there. The tree had a huge hole in the middle of it.
The father saw this and thought there would be many marsupials piled inside the tree.
He climbed the tree. He went up to the crown of the
tree and saw the hole. However, he was afraid to go inside
the hole, so he went back down to the ground and told his
son to climb it.
Nime listened and said, “Give me the axe and spear,
then I'll climb.” However his father said, “No. Just go up
and look, then come down again.”
Nime persisted, so his father gave him the spear and
axe, then Nime went up the tree. He climbed and climbed,
then he arrived at the crown.
When he looked inside the hole, he saw a beautiful
house inside the tree. There was also a good place to sleep
there. When Nime saw this, his thoughts were confused, so
he went down to the last branch of the tree and began to cut
the tree branch.
His father saw this and called out for Nime to come
down. However Nime called down to his father, “Papa,
you can go back to your home now. I'll stay here.”
The father called out and tried to coax him, but to no
avail. Nime went inside the tree hole and stayed there. The
father kept calling out, then gave up and cried. Afterwards,
he returned to the village.
When he arrived, his wife saw him and asked, “You
came alone. Where’s Nime?” Poor Daga heard this and
cried. He told his wife what had happened to their son.
The next day, Daga awoke in the very early morning.
He carried ripe bananas and some other good food, then he
returned to the place where his son had gone inside the tree
hole.
He arrived at the tree, then he took a piece of wood and
struck the base of the big tree. Oh my, when Daga looked
up, he saw that his son had completely changed. His skin
was bright red and he did not look like his son, Nime.
The second day, the father again went to this place and
again struck the base of the tree. When Nime appeared, the
father saw that his son had changed completely and become
a bird of paradise. The father was very troubled, so he returned to the village and never went back to see his son.
Nime’s mother was troubled about her son for a long
time. One day, her husband, Daga, traveled to another
place. The mother followed the trail that her husband had
taken to the place where Nime lived.
The mother walked and walked until she arrived at the
big tree. She saw that the base of the tree was completely
clean from where her husband had beaten the base of the
tree.
The mother was surprised to see this. She took a stick
by the base of the tree and beat the tree hard. When she
looked up, she saw that her son had become a bird of paradise and was perched at the crown of the tree.
The mother cried terribly and called out Nime’s name.
Nime had become a bird, so he was afraid when he heard
his mother’s crying. He removed his feathers and tail then
threw them down to his mother. He flew to the mountains
by Bundi Village in Madang Province [Gende People].
When Nime’s father went and saw that his son was not
there, he was very troubled and began to look around for
Nime. The father followed him until he arrived at a mountain. He stood on this mountain, looked down, and saw
their son, Nime, going around with the other birds. 
