Wirikaira Found a Lake 
(Wantok 584, August 17, 1985, page 24) 
Long ago, there was a lake in a forest called Namodian 
in the Gomia area of Simbu Province [Chuave People]. 
There was not a single man or woman who had found this 
lake. One time, a great fight came between the Kinogu and 
the Gomia clans in this forest. It was then that they found 
this lake. 
The two clans, Gomia and Kinogu, fought and ap- 
proached this lake. However, they did not know that it was 
there because it was filled with grasses and the water was 
beneath the grasses. 
As they fought, the Konogu [Kinogu] pushed the 
Gomia back, and went close to the water. An old man 
named Wirikaira from the Gomia Clan trampled the grass. 
The ground was completely soft and the water took 
Wirikaira down. Wirikaira did not know how to swim in 
the water, so he did not resurface. The grass covered him 
over. 
After the fight ended, all of the men went back home. 
The Gomia looked for old Wirikaira who had not returned 
to the village. His kin thought that the enemies had killed 
him at the battle scene. 
The next morning, the men of Gomia searched for him 
at the site of the big battle. Some men followed the path 
that the old man had run, and they saw the lake there. 
Some places were filled with forest and grasses, and this 
had obscured the lake. 

509
They found the place where Wirikaira had fallen. His 
family had thought that Wirikaira had died underwater, so 
they cried near the water. 
The men cleared this place where the water had taken 
the old man down. They waited and saw the men trying to 
find Wirikaira’s body. While his family was waiting, they 
were shocked to see old Wirikaira rising up from the water. 
The old man carried sugarcanes and bananas for 
planting. When his wives saw this, they were afraid and 
got up to run away. They thought that this was Wirikaira’s 
ghost coming up from the water. 
However, Wirikaira called out for them to return for 
him to tell his story. He told them that he was not dead. He 
had just slept underwater with some of the clan. 
However his daughters were even more afraid, so they 
took their elders back to the village. Wirikaira went to the 
village and he told the story to the villagers. 
Wirikaira told the story of the water taking him down. 
In the place where he went underwater, there was a very big 
door. There was a man who was in charge of this door. 
The man opened the door and quickly took him inside. 
Inside, there was a village. The man took Wirikaira in- 
side a house. Wirikaira told the story of how he had seen 
many houses and very nice things underwater. 
He said that he slept just one night inside this house. 
The next morning, the people of the village gathered sugar- 
canes and bananas for Wirikaira to carry back with him. 
The underwater people told Wirikaira, “When you go 
up to your village, you must hold tightly onto these bananas 
and sugarcanes that we’ve given to you. Later, you must 
plant them and they’ll grow well because these are things to 
be eaten.” 
After they finished speaking, they held his two legs 
while the bananas and sugarcanes hung about from his arms 
and sides. The people held Wirikaira’s two legs and swung 
him up above the water. 
His family was sitting and crying by the water when 
they had seen old Wirikaira shooting up above the water 
with the sugarcanes and bananas hanging around his body 
that were to be planted. 
After this time, there were sugarcanes and bananas 
growing in the gardens in the Gomia People’s area of 
Simbu Province. Wirikaira’s story is very important among 
the Gomia. Later, the Kinogu People found out that the 
Gomia had bananas and sugarcanes. The Kinongu 
[Kinogu] Clan did not have these. This knowledge brought 
more fighting because the Kinogu often stole sugarcanes 
and bananas from the Gomia’s gardens. This lake became the Gomia People’s property, and it 
is the only lake in the area. Whichever clan wanted to do 
work there or just use the water of the lake would cause a 
big fight to arise again. 
Now, we Gomia People often go looking for small fish 
in this lake in the Namodian forest. 
