A Boy Tricked Two Girls 
(Wantok 492, October 29, 1983, page 27) 
Long, long ago, in the time of the ancestors, there was 
a couple who lived in a village. This couple did not have 
children. 
They were married for many years, but they had not 
had any children until one time when they had a baby. This 
newborn baby was a boy. 
At the very same time, another woman in this village 
gave birth to a baby girl. This woman already had another 
daughter. When the two daughters grew up, they looked 
exactly like twins. That was because the elder sister had 
not grown quickly. 
The boy had grown up near the village. From the time 
that he was little, his parents had not explained to the other 
people of the village that he was a boy. No, they all 
thought that he was just a girl. 
When the little boy grew up and began to walk around, 
his father gave him the name Manga. Manga’s mother 
made a girl’s “grass” skirt for Manga. That year, Manga traveled with the girls of the village. He traveled with 
them, played with them, and did the things that girls do in a 
group. He grew up with them. 
The girls thought that he was a girl and so did their par- 
ents. He made good friends with the two girls who lived in 
the middle of the village, the ones who looked like twins. 
Manga traveled to all of the places with the girls. 
Manga was very good friends with the two sisters. When 
the girls went to bathe or play in the water, Manga would 
play or bathe with his skirt on. He never removed it like the 
other girls did. 
They would ask him, and Manga would tell them that 
his mother forbade him to bathe naked. His parents treated 
him very well because they had been without children for a 
long time. They treated him well when he was still little. 
They called him a girl and put him near the girls. 
At the same time, they wanted him to grow up with the 
girls and to travel with them. Later, they could still promise 
a good wife for him. 
One time, all of the girls of the village, Manga’s group, 
went to play together, cook some food, and travel in the 
forest. Later, they went to bathe in the river. Manga did 
not remove his skirt. His breasts had not developed. The 
girls asked him, “Friend, why haven’t your breasts come 
out? All of us, your girlfriends, have breasts. Also, you 
always play in the water with your skirt. You never remove 
it like we do.” 
No Breasts 
The young man, Manga, lied to them, “No, my father 
sang and danced at my food so that when I ate it, my breasts 
did not develop as quickly as yours. After some years I'll 
have them. My mother makes a new ‘grass’ skirt for me all 
of the time. She wants me to bathe with the skirt all of the 
time. So, this is what I always do.” 
It was nearly time for Manga to become a man and to 
look like a man. His parents prepared all of the things. 
This was a very big day. At night, his father taught Manga 
what he must do the next day. 
He told him that it would be time for him to marry and 
that he could no longer travel with the women. It would be 
bad if he stayed any longer with women since they would 
quickly see that he was a man. Manga had become a very 
handsome young man. 
In the afternoon, two girls, sisters, came up to the 
house, looking for Manga. They wanted to go hunting for 
wild game on the next day, like girls of the village often 
did. Manga’s mother saw them and asked them about this. 
351 

382
They told Manga’s mother that they wanted Manga to 
travel with them in the forest. 
Lying to Them 
Manga’s mother told them that only the two of them 
and Manga should go, that they should not go with the oth- 
ers. Manga’s mother lied to them because Manga did not 
like the other girls of the village. If only the three of them 
went, that would be fine. At this time, Manga was sitting 
like a man in the house with his father. 
He sat there and listened to all of the lies that his 
mother told the two sisters. That night, Manga’s father 
sang and danced. He spat many kinds of ginger upon 
Manga, drenching him, and Manga became a real man. He 
was completely muscular, so when women would see him, 
they fell for him. 
His father told him that the day when he takes the two 
young women with him, he must be careful. When they 
were ready to go and play in the water, Manga must eat his 
father’s ginger then sing and dance there. That would make 
him look like a real man. 
Another morning, the two sisters came to get Manga. 
Manga was still like a woman. All of the things went in a 
net bag that he put on his head. He fastened this to his 
“grass” skirt. They went off to the forest, like they always 
did. The two women really did not know that Manga was a 
man. 
Teaching 
Manga’s father had taught him what he should do. His 
father had given him two citrus fruits that he tied up well 
and covered with a small net bag. Manga put this down 
into a very big net bag and carried it on his head like 
women carry net bags. 
They looked for tulip leaves and other kinds of foods in 
the forest. Then it was time for them to rest and go look for 
a stream in which to bathe. They all went to bathe. The 
two sisters removed their skirts, but Manga did not. Then 
they bathed. Manga took the ginger that his father had 
given him. He chewed it and spat it upon himself. Then he 
prepared to hold the citruses in his hands. 
They played a game where one would go down into the 
water and then resurface. If the other woman hit the diver 
with the wild citrus, she would score a point for herself. 
This was a contest played all of the time at this village. 
Manga told the two women that they should both go 
down into the water and then come up again. When they 
went down, Manga spat ginger on himself for a second 
time, then he became an excellent man. He stood on a log 
552 that was floating near where they were bathing. With the 
two domesticated citruses that his father had given him, he 
sang at his hands. Quickly, he tore off the skirt in which he 
had always bathed. Then he stood as a real man. 
He held a citrus in each of his hands. The young sister 
drifted downstream and came up first. The big sister swam 
down and had not surfaced yet. 
When the little sister surfaced, Manga hit her body 
with the citrus and called out, “You’re mine.” Then the big 
sister went above the water and he struck her with the cit- 
rus. Manga called out, “O ooooh, you’re mine.” Manga 
told them, “You two thought that I was a girl. No, you’re 
my wives now.” 
The two of them both shouted and cried and cried. 
They went to the village and told their parents. Everyone in 
the village heard this news that Manga was a boy and that 
he had always pretended to be a girl. 
Another girl who often traveled with Manga was 
happy. She said that it was good and that they would no 
longer travel with him. However, when they saw Manga 
with the two sisters who were his wives, they fell over be- 
cause he had become a very handsome man in the village. 
Manga married the two sisters. The little sister who he had 
marked with the citrus became his first wife. The other 
woman was her big sister. 
