(Wantok 537, September 15, 1984, page 20) 
Long, long ago, in the time of the ancestors, there were 
various kinds of people. In the area by Madang, there was 
an island that had a man with one huge leg [Bilbil or 
Gedaged People?, Madang Province]. This man’s leg had 
swollen and become very large. The people of this island 
called him Big Leg. 
One morning on the mainland, a man and his wife went 
to the garden. They walked to the garden hut and the man 
told his wife, “Stay in the garden hut. I’ll go get some betel 
nuts and peppers from over there, then I'll return.” The 
woman stayed there and made a fire. Smoke rose from the 
fire. 
On the island, Big Leg saw the smoke rising. He 
thought, “There must be another village on the mainland by 
the beach. There must be more beautiful women over there. 
Is the smoke coming from far away? Are they men or 
women? I’ll go and see.” 
Big Leg took his canoe and paddled slowly. One of his 
legs was enormous and the other was puny. He was afraid 
of becoming stuck at sea and drowning, because the weight 
of his leg could sink him. Before, when he was a boy, he 
had never swum out from the village into the sea. He had 
never swum once. 
He sat and paddled to the place where the smoke rose. 
He went ashore on the beach and walked quietly. He saw a 
woman sitting near a fire and cooking some food. 
The good-for-nothing was ecstatic. The woman’s hus- 
band was getting betel nuts and peppers, and he was not 
415 

446
worried about her because this was not the first time for 
them to walk into the forest. 
Big Leg stood in hiding and he looked at what the 
woman was making. He was a little afraid that her husband 
was nearby. He hid to find out whether the woman had 
come alone or not. Later, when he did not see another man, 
the good-for-nothing just ran out and pulled the woman by 
her hand while he shut her mouth. 
Big Leg told her, “If you call out, I’ll kill you. You 
must shut up if you want to see the moon, the sun, or your 
parents.” He took the woman out to the beach and put her 
in the canoe. He paddled back to his island. 
They arrived on the island and he took the woman to 
his parents. The parents saw the woman and they were very 
happy because the island did not have women that liked 
him. This was because he had a big leg. 
Big Leg’s father beat the signal drum to announce that 
there would be a festival to celebrate his marriage. Big 
Leg’s mother adorned the woman. Big Leg’s father 
adorned him. However, the woman was not happy... she 
just cried. 
When his mother asked the woman why she was cry- 
ing, the woman replied, “I’m so happy because this is the 
first time that I’ve seen a man that I’ll marry. In the place 
where I live, we’ve never seen a man. Only women live 
there.” 
Big Leg asked his mother whether his woman was all 
right. The mother sent a message to Big Leg, “Son, you 
must be happy. The woman loves you and is very happy to 
marry you. Their village does not have men and she was 
happy to see you and to marry you. She is crying because 
she is so happy.” 
Big Leg listened to this and told his father, “You must 
adorn me well, and put on all kinds of adornments on my 
bad leg to hide it so that the woman can’t see it. She’ll lust 
for me even more when I sing and dance.” However, it was 
just a lie. The woman was worried and cried for her hus- 
band on the mainland that she had left. 
In the garden on the mainland, the woman’s husband 
returned to see that his wife was not there. However, he 
saw the ashes of the fire that she had thrown on her way 
when Big Leg had dragged her off. The woman’s husband 
followed these marks until he arrived at the beach. 
He saw the place where the canoe had landed and he 
saw his wife’s footprints. He saw Big Leg’s footprints too. 
He saw that one leg was tiny and the other leg was huge. 
The man thought, “A masalai must have carried my 
wife into the water.” He sat and looked across the sea, and 
he cried. Then he got up and walked back to the village. 
416 That night on the island, they had a big celebration. 
All of the men, women and children filled Big Leg’s home. 
Big Leg’s parents prepared a big feast. The people gath- 
ered to eat, smoke, laugh and beat the hand drums. Oh my, 
they were happy. 
However, the woman sat and worried. She cried 
harder. Big Leg’s mother told her to go befriend Big Leg, 
and to sing and dance with him. So, they sang and danced 
together. The woman only sang and danced a little, then 
she went and sat back down. 
Big Leg’s mother saw this, so she also left the dance 
area to find her new daughter-in-law. The woman was sit- 
ting and crying harder. She cried through the night and her 
two eyes. became terribly red and swollen. But you know, 
that night, the people and the mother too did not understand 
that the woman was worried. 
Big Leg wanted the woman to see how well he sang 
and danced, so he did not go around singing and dancing 
like the other men. He just stood in one place near where 
his wife and mother were sitting. 
He showed them how well he danced even though his 
huge leg made it very hard for him to kneel down and 
dance. Big Leg turned and asked his mother, “Do you see 
this? Aren’t my adornments are beautiful?” 
The mother replied, “You’re very handsome with all 
your adornments. They leave me speechless.” 
Big Leg did not sing and dance as much, but he still 
stood with his back to all of the men. He faced his mother 
and wife. He struck his hand drum, bent his knees, lied 
down, and arose again. He asked his mother again, “My 
wife, isn’t my singing and dancing stylish?” 
The mother replied, “Oh my! That looks just like you. 
She tells me that she loves only you and that she’s sitting 
very close to you to see how you sing and dance.” 
However, it was not true. The woman just sat there 
and did not want to see this big-legged man. She cried for 
the good husband that she had left at home, 
Later, Big Leg still felt bad, so he wanted to see his 
wife and tell her about her Big Leg. He went to hold her 
hand. He told her, “Get up and look at all of the married 
people singing and dancing together. Get up and hold my 
hand, then sing and dance when I beat the hand drum. 
We'll sing and dance around happily with all of the other 
people.” 
The woman listened and arose, then they sang and 
danced together. Big Leg was very happy that the woman 
held his hand. He beat the hand drum, bent his knees, lay 
down, and then rose again. However, the woman just sang 

447
very quietly. She began to think that this was a good time 
for her to run away. She began to think of a way to escape. 
They sang and danced until dawn, then everyone went 
back to their houses to sleep. They were exhausted because 
they had sung, danced, and eaten through the night. So, 
everyone collapsed and slept. 
Big Leg and his wife and parents also slept. Big Leg 
told his mother, “I’m exhausted, so I’ll sleep. You must 
look at the woman. Whatever she wants, you must give 
her. You must take care of her.” 
The mother told him, “Son, don’t worry.” However, 
the mother did not follow through on what she had told her 
son. Before long, the mother also was snoring. She had 
also fallen dead asleep. 
Then the woman got up very quietly, ran and hid in the 
forest. She went and took the canoe, then very quickly pad- 
dled away from the island. The woman paddled well and 
arrived quickly at the garden. She followed the garden trail 
and arrived at the hut. She saw her real husband, held him 
and cried. Later, she told the story to her husband about 
what had happened to her. 
The man listened to this and was furious. He told his 
wife, “Don’t cry anymore, you’ve returned. Now I’ll watch 
carefully. If this Big Leg comes to look for you, he'll be 
shot right through with my spear. Then I'll tie a tanget 
plant to mark that I’ve killed a man.” 
On the island, Big Leg woke up to find that the woman 
was not there. He was furious at his mother. He and his 
father beat the poor old mother. Big Leg was furious. He 
told his mother, “I’ll get the woman back. I know which 
way she went. She said that her village has no men. Pll go 
with the some single men from the village to the woman’s 
village and bring more women back to the island.” 
On the mainland, the woman and the man decided to 
go to the garden. The man told the woman, “You must 
make a bonfire so that the smoke rises high, and so that Big 
Leg will see it and come. I'll hide carefully. When he 
comes to get you, you must walk in the front and let Big 
Leg go behind you. I'll see him clearly and shoot him dead 
with the spear.” 
The woman listened carefully to what he said, then 
they went back to the garden. The woman made a bonfire 
and sat in the garden hut. She pretended to cook food. The 
woman was dressed finely, so that Big Leg would lust for 
her. 
On the island, Big Leg saw the smoke and lusted for 
her [lit., “swallowed his spit”]. He dressed finely as if for a 
festival. Big Leg took a canoe and paddled quietly away. He went up to the woman, held her and asked, “Why 
did you run away?” 
The woman replied, “I ran away because I was worried 
about my mother, so I paddled the canoe to see her. | 
hadn’t gone to the village, so I was worried and cried. It 
was good to come and talk with her. So now I’ve come to 
wait for you.” 
He held the 
woman’s hand. He told the woman, “Get up, let’s go now. Big Leg heard this and was happy. 
I saw the smoke and I knew that it was you here. So, I 
came to fetch you.” 
They got up and left. However, the woman’s husband 
was lying in wait. The woman followed her husband’s in- 
structions and went first while Big Leg walked behind her. 
The woman’s husband aimed carefully at the small 
piece of forest behind the base of a big tree. When Big Leg 
passed by it, the man threw the spear hard and it went di- 
rectly through Big Leg’s chest. The spear went through his 
back. 
Big Leg fell down and just spoke a little, “You worth- 
less lying woman. It was a trap.” 
The woman’s husband jumped over to Big Leg and 
said, “Ah friend, where are you going? You ruined my 
wife, but now you’ll see the moon, the sun and your par- 
ents. Where are you going now?” 
The man put another spear through Big Leg’s head and 
finished him off. They carried his corpse with the spears 
and put it in the canoe. They told Big Leg’s corpse, “You 
can’t go wandering about. You must carefully steer your 
canoe to your island home.” 
The canoe with the corpse drifted directly towards his 
home and landed on the beach. Later, the people found Big 
Leg’s body with the two spears still stuck into his body. 
The people of the island saw this and were terrified. 
They thought that the men of the opposite shore must have 
killed him. It was at this time too that they knew that there 
were men who lived there and not just women. 
